 Grandma's on the Xbox, Mum's following family news on Twitter and Dad's talking to the kids on Skype so the answer is no Aleks Krotoski The Observer, Sunday 26 December 2010 United online: family values survive the internet. Photograph: Royalty Free We, my friends, are doomed. As you sit belching your way through holiday gluttony, updating your Facebook status while watching in horror as Grandma attempts another personal best on Kinect and little Jane shoves her new iPad in your face, society is crumbling around us. At the centre of our demise is the decline in the most sacred of social units, the family. And you yes you are responsible. Why? Because by communicating with your friends and loved ones via the world wide web you are actively colluding with the terrible culprit that's systematically upsetting the precarious social balance that separates us from the other primates. "The Internet Causes Death!" one unhinged headline reads. "The web is turning our children into code junkies!" says another. And there you sit, tweeting away, unaware that the pied piper is coming to shove your family off a cliff. Oh, give over. The decline of the traditionally understood family has been on the cards since the sociopathic Cain knocked off his brother, Abel, for Daddy's fortune and that proto-emo Hamlet staged a passive-aggressive dig at his mum for poisoning his dad. Within the last 60 years, the piper role has been played by eternal teenager James Dean, a mop-topped Beatle, the oversexed Jimmy Page, the squat plumber Mario and the demon Marilyn Manson. Now that we've hit the 21st century, he looks like inauspicious Harvard drop-out Mark Zuckerberg. Tell me how this is a bad thing; frankly, I think we're on the up. Researchers who've been studying the family from the days before the web had already described how family life was weakening because of the rise of individualism. Divorce was already on the increase before email, instant messaging and Facebook. Families were even then eating fewer meals together. It's an insidious trait of the adults of one modern era to point the finger at a technology they don't understand and blame it for the next generation's behaviour that they can't control. "But but but," I hear you protest, "what about the children? They're learning bad things online!" Yes and they used to hang out on street corners and learn bad things there too. Now that we're so scared of one another in real-life that we won't pop next door for a cup of sugar in case the lollipop man has a gun or is a paedophile, the web is our way out of our gilded cages. And as escape crafts go, it's a pretty good one. The web isn't killing family; if anything, it's saving it. We live in an increasingly transient world, where the need to make a living has given rise to mass migration to urban centres in every country. Children are separated from parents, siblings from one another and the web has provided us with the devices that make it easy to stay in touch. I live in the UK and communicate with my mum in India and my dad in Louisiana for virtually nothing. Mum follows my Twitter feed and my Flickr account and probably knows me better now than she has at any other point in my adult life. John is a reader of this column whose job separates him from his kids, aged from five to nine, but he uses games and Skype to read to, play with and hang out with them for at least an hour a day before bedtime. "I read about someone's dad, many years ago, playing chess with his son using a Velcro board and the postal service," says John. "It's about inventiveness. My partner and I share a Club Penguin account; we do up our igloo as a place that is ours for the kids to visit whenever they like." This is nothing novel; a 2008 report from the Pew Internet American Life group concluded: "Technology is enabling new forms of family connectedness that revolve around remote mobile phone interactions and communal internet experiences." The closeness facilitated by the web that John describes doesn't replace face-to-face contact you can't, for example, "have a hug", as his nine-year-old son Josh says but it's better than nothing. In many ways, like the way in which it has created a global network, it's much better. There have been a few headline-grabbing reports of people finding long-lost family through social networks, which actually happened to another friend of mine. After years of thwarted attempts to find a sibling through traditional means, she and her sister followed the traces they'd left about themselves on Facebook. After making a few educated guesses and poking around a bit, they were reunited for the first time in their lives. Everything I've been talking about is based on a very traditional account of the "family": siblings, kids, parents. But the 21st-century family is cut from a very different cloth than previous generations'. Nick Henry, managing director of the recently created celebration National Family Week, describes the modern family as being "a lot more flexible than it has been: it covers those who are closest to you who support you through difficult times and decisions". This broader family church, unrecognised by governments and most policy wonks, is undoubtedly supported in online interactions. Another Pew report, of 2009, reviews all the literature that describes the depth and breadth of online connections that fall outside kinship groups and it describes how new technologies actually provide family-like social integration rather than encourage isolation. Web technology itself hasn't undermined the foundations of the institution of the family. We've been doing that to families without it for centuries. What seems to be happening is that our online activity is actually reversing a worrying trend. So go on, post that video of Grandma on the Xbox to YouTube. She may not thank you for it now, but Uncle Bob, trapped in Basingstoke because of the snow, will appreciate it for ever. 