 Bless me, Apple, for I have sinned Can virtual confessional iPhone apps, Confession and Penance, give non-Catholics an insight into what the sacrament is like? Adam Boult guardian.co.uk, Thursday 10 February 2011 15.56 GMT 'To many non-Catholics, the act of confession can sound rather intriguing.' Photograph: David Turnley/Corbis So the Catholic church has approved its first iPhone app. Taking it's lead from last year's World Communications Day papal address, in which Catholics were called on to embrace the potential of the internet, developer Little iApps has released a program it claims is "the perfect aid for every penitent". Featuring a "step-by-step guide to the sacrament", Confession: A Roman Catholic App invites Catholics to "prayerfully prepare for and participate in the Rite of Penance". It may well also appeal to many non-Catholics, to whom the act of confession can sound rather intriguing, like a cross between ringing the Samaritans and jumping into a magical guilt-alleviating power shower. There's even some evidence that opening up in confession can have positive physical effects: one 1986 study at Dallas' Southern Methodist University found that those encouraged to take part in regular "self-reflective venting of emotions" experienced fewer health problems than a control group. Could apps like Confession give non-Catholics a commitment-free insight into what the sacrament is really like? While Confession does come with the official blessing of Indiana Bishop Kevin C Rhoades, the church has been quick to emphasise that it's not a substitute for the real thing. Vatican spokesman Federico Lombardi said: "It is essential to understand well the sacrament of penitence requires the personal dialogue between the penitent and the confessor and the absolution by the confessor. This cannot in any way be substituted by a technology application." However, another iPhone app, albeit one without Vatican approval, is aiming to do just that. Penance is seeking to use the sacrament as a jumping off point for establishing an online community full of sinners anonymously confessing their hearts out to one another. Developer Hasham Abbas says: "With churchgoing at an all-time low, and the digital age leaving us disconnected from our families and communities, few have an outlet for healthy confession. So it made sense to give people a virtual confession booth where they can unload whatever has been troubling their conscience." Prior to the Catholic church's endorsement of the Confession app, some had expressed offence at the very idea of co-opting the language and imagery of the confessional to sell to iPhone users. One reviewer of Penance said: "This app belittles the sacrament of reconciliation, twisting it from a tender act of love and forgiveness, into a salacious game where sinning is encouraged, and shame is mocked. This is anti-Catholic bigotry, pure and simple. Can you imagine an app that mocked Moslems or Jews this way?" While Confession seems to be little more than an oddly conceived effort to encourage more Catholics to return to the sacrament, Penance is much more like the conventional internet: anyone who might be tempted to approach this virtual confessional in a serious manner ought to prepare themselves for the bawdiness, bad language and troll-like behaviour that's part and parcel of pretty much any online community with low barriers to membership. According to the Catechism of the Catholic Church, "the regular confession of our venial sins helps us form our conscience, fight against evil tendencies, let ourselves be healed by Christ and progress in the life of the Spirit The beginning of good works is the confession of evil works." But whether or not you're using an iPhone to help unburden yourself, it's a good idea to have some idea of exactly who it is you're confessing to. 