 Anti-piracy measures move apace despite long delay to Digital Economy Act Jeremy Hunt Photograph: Dan Kitwood/Getty Images The culture secretary, Jeremy Hunt, appeared to have kicked the ball into the long grass when he asked Ofcom to review the workability of the government's controversial web blocking plans earlier this year. In fact, measures that could put some 100 alleged illegal filesharing websites behind a new internet firewall continue to move apace. Proposals are being mooted on two fronts: one could establish a new version of the Internet Watch Foundation (IWF) – the organisation which presently scours the net for illegal images of children, obscene adult content and "non-photographic child sexual abuse hosted in the UK" – to deal with illicit filesharing; the other would put Google and the government on a collision course. Proposal #1 Rights holders and internet providers are understood to be roughly in favour of an industry-wide " voluntary code ". This code would govern how and which filesharing sites are censored. Rights holders would likely have to satisfy a number of points – for example, how much of the site is infringing? – before a Pirate Bay-like site would appear to vanish from British screens. It would still be there, just unreachable. But that wouldn't be the end of the process. The code could establish a independent third body akin to the IWF that would implement the code and ultimately decide which filesharing sites are censored. No small feat. Detractors argue that such a newly created body would simply be too expensive and time consuming – not to mention how you decide who sits on its board. A second variant, favoured by the legal professionals, is for a judge to rule whether a site should be blocked after the voluntary code has been satisfied. This would quell ISPs' fears about having to paying compensation to sites that claim to have been wrongly blocked, and also negate the need for a new body. The blocking techniques involve a variety of methods. The belief is that they will be powerful and effective. But they are potentially expensive, because as the idea is not to block entire sites, but just the parts of them where there is pirated material. That's rather like the IWF, which does the same(with mixed results in the worst case), and it's very labour-intensive. Get it wrong - by banning the wrong part of a site, or the wrong site, or not banning something - and there could be no end of trouble. Proposal #2 How about Ofcom's web blocking review? The first key difference with the Ofcom review is that it has been asked to do its work against the backdrop of the Digital Economy Act - in other words, this won't be voluntary, but set in a statutory context. The media regulator is expected to advise Hunt at the end of the month on the following terms: • Is it possible for access to a site to be blocked by internet service providers? • How robust would such a block be – in other words would it have the intended effect, and how easy would it be to circumvent for most site operators? • What measures might be adopted by internet service providers to prevent such circumvention? • How granular can blocking be – i.e. can specific parts of a site be blocked, how precise can this be, and how effective? • How effective are sections 17 and 18 of the Act in providing for an appropriate method of generating lists of sites to be blocked? OK. So how would blocking work in the Ofcom model? According to people consulted by Ofcom in recent weeks, the regulator is thought to be "leaning down the domain name blocking route". Although Ofcom is not expected to recommend one blocking method over another, it will spell out the pros and cons of each. Domain name blocking – or DNS blocking – makes an entire site unavailable, not just parts of it, and is relatively inexpensive for ISPs to implement. Italy has used it to block the Pirate Bay, while parts of Scandinavia use it to censor child abuse sites. However, British internet users will be able to subvert this block simply by going to Google. The search giant offers an " alternative DNS provider ", meaning any internet user can ditch the setup offered by their ISP and use Google's own. Would Google block sites like the Pirate Bay, BitTorrent or Newzbin2? We'll let that question hang. A lost cause? Whether any of this will work depends on your terms of definition. While acknowledging that the "most determined" infringers can circumvent web censors, rights holders insist that most people don't bother and it is simply to "enforce a code of behaviour". If something is on the internet, it must be legal. Right? Others argue that blocking access to filesharing sites will simply make workarounds a common currency. Asked how easy these filters are to circumvent, one prominent web blocking expert told me: "You need a reading age of about 8. You should go talk to school children and ask whether the blocks their school puts up are effective." "I don't expect ministers to be experts, but I expect them to talk to experts for a few minutes to see how it works before they open their mouth." It's a big debate, with lots at stake. Where do you stand? Do you use illicit sites, and would you still do so if they were blocked? 