 Meet Watson, the computer set to outsmart the champions of Jeopardy! Watson, an IBM computer is to compete on the US gameshow Jeopardy! – and it will probably win Tom Lamont The Observer, Sunday 6 February 2011 They were creamed. Watson bossed things from the start, buzzing in with answers on questions about the walls of Jericho and Agatha Christie before either man could get to his button. Watson answered in a mellifluous computerised voice – think Stephen Hawking with extra zing – and in a neat visual trick its screen avatar changed colour depending on how sure it was about each answer. It was 97% certain Agatha Christie had once taken part in an archeological dig in Syria, and so glowed green ; whether Macaulay Culkin had appeared in MyGirl proved more of a challenge and Watson, only 67% convinced, glowed yellow. The machine is so powerful, IBM claims, that the average home computer would need two hours to deconstruct and answer live questions like these; Watson can do it in less than three seconds. Powered by 2,880 processor cores and using 15TB of ram, it's thus a cumbersome beast. The flatscreen was only a front for the cameras; the real work was done backstage where Watson's 10 racks of computer guts whirred away at up to 80 teraflops, taking up roughly the same amount of space as a room-size wardrobe. Because of its size Watson currently resides behind thick glass at IBM's New York HQ, but the company is looking forward to a day when miniature Watsons will be commercially available. Future iterations, says Gondek, will be "smaller, use less energy… Everyone could have one." The humanitarian ideal – and ask any sci-fi writer, there's always a humanitarian ideal – is that the machine will one day be canny enough to aid busy doctors by diagnosing patients and assessing x-rays. No word about potential jobs at the Pentagon. Instead, Watson awaits his American television debut. After such a dominant performance at the test event the machine looks certain to secure the most high-profile victory for artificial over organic intelligence since 1997, when Garry Kasparov was beaten at chess by another IBM-made computer, Deep Blue. Brad and Ken's best hope might lie in there being a lot of questions about Macaulay Culkin. Although in truth it might be safer all round if Watson wins. During the test event, when Ken or Brad finally buzzed in to answer a question first, Watson's avatar briefly flashed an angry orange. It all happened in a split-second and nobody on set seemed to notice, but Brad later made a crack about being "afraid of Watson's progeny coming back from the future to kill me". For all our sakes, Brad, don't provoke it. 