 Data regulator slammed over small number of penalties issued since it was given greater powers in April 2010 Of the 2,565 data breaches recorded since April 2010, only 36 have resulted in a punishment – and only four have resulted in financial penalties The majority of breaches of the Data Protection Act in the past year have been committed by private companies – but public sector bodies like local government have landed 80% of the punishments, according to new figures released under the Freedom of Information Act. We've long wondered where the majority of data breaches – like lost laptops, email leaks, missing tax discs, etc – come from. Not least because the information commissioner 's office(ICO) seems to only make a noise about public sector transgressions. Figures obtained by encryption specialist ViaSat under the FoI Act show that since April 2010, roughly* 59% of all data breaches – those that have been reported and identified by the ICO as a breach – are related to private companies. However, 32 of the 40 penalties have been inflicted on public bodies.(*The exact proportion is difficult to ascertain as some sectors, such as health, are comprised of both public and private organisations). Breaches of the DPA recorded by ICO between 6 April 2010 and 22 March 2011, by sector(Squint and click to see sector) As the pie chart shows, private lenders account for the most breaches, closely followed by local government and then the health sector, largely comprised of the NHS. Within the private sector, financial organisations account for almost one in five breaches. Of the 2,565 data breaches recorded since April 2010, when the ICO was given greater powers to penalise infringing organisations, only 36 have resulted in a punishment – and only four have resulted in financial penalties. The smallest fine – £60,000 – was levied against the private employment services company A4e was in June after it lost a laptop holding unencrypted sensitive information about 24,000 people. Chris McIntosh, the chief executive of ViaSat UK, argues that if the ICO is going to be "more than an organisation handing out fines to local government" then it needs to be given more regulatory powers – something that privacy groups have long argued should happen. He said: "The ICO has stated that the private sector has a worse grasp of the Data Protection Act than the public. However, the ICO's actions so far do not seem to encourage any improvement. "For example, other organisations can easily look at the £60,000 penalty meted out to A4e, its size compared to the company's £145m turnover, its rarity and the fact that A4e is still receiving plenty of business, from the government no less, and feel that the risk of ICO action is one they are prepared to take." An ICO spokesman said its focus on getting bodies to comply with the Data Protection Act "isn't always best achieved by issuing organisations or businesses with monetary penalties." The spokesman added: "The action we will take depends entirely on the details of each individual case. The existence of civil monetary penalties has had a markedly beneficial effect on compliance generally. The big stick is there, but doesn't need to be deployed all the time to have an effect. "Good regulation is about getting the best result in the public interest. For a monetary penalty to be served the information commissioner has to satisfy a strict set of criteria including that the breach could have caused substantial damage or substantial distress to individuals and that the organisation knew, or ought to have known, that there was a risk that a breach may occur. "We will always consider the imposition of a monetary penalty where these criteria are met." 