 Murdoch's iPad paper the Daily delays launch News Corp had been expected to unveil the Daily next week alongside Apple chief Steve Jobs James Robinson guardian.co.uk, Friday 14 January 2011 12.20 GMT The Daily: it is thought that the delay will be weeks rather than months. The launch of Rupert Murdoch 's eagerly anticipated iPad -only newspaper the Daily has been delayed by several weeks. All Things Digital, a technology website owned by the Wall Street Journal, reported that News Corporation and Apple, the project collaborators, have cancelled a launch planned for Wednesday. A News Corp insider confirmed to MediaGuardian.co.uk that the launch had been delayed. It is thought that the delay will be weeks rather than months. The News Corp chairman and chief executive, Rupert Murdoch, had been expected to personally unveil the Daily alongside the Apple co-founder and chief executive, Steve Jobs. It is believed Apple is still working on changes to iTunes, which will introduce a subscription service that will automatically bill the Daily's users on a weekly or monthly basis for the cost of receiving the download each morning. That involves making some major changes to the service, which currently charges users each time they buy music or another product. News Corp had planned to unveil the Daily at the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art on Wednesday. The company has hired about 100 journalists to work on the project, which is being touted internally as one of News Corp's premium editorial products even before its launch. It is expected to showcase video content along with the written word and is aimed at a younger audience. Some clues about the new iPad paper's content were provided by US journalism website Poynter's Damon Kiesow, who has looked at the source code for TheDaily.com website. Murdoch has high hopes for the Daily, which could demonstrate there is demand for a paid-for digital news product. News International, the company's UK newspaper business, has introduced paywalls at the Times, Sunday Times and News of the World but the jury is still out on whether the experiment will prove a success. Subscriber numbers are believed to be small, although the precise number of users is difficult to calculate because the company has not provided a detailed breakdown. News International is expected to publish a second set of subscriber figures for the Times and Sunday Times in the coming week, however. To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediaguardian.co.uk or phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for publication". 