 Cloudy outlook for businesses Cloud computing may be a way of saving costs but how can firms be sure data is kept safe and complies with the law? Adam Rose guardian.co.uk, Tuesday 22 February 2011 10.37 GMT Cloud computing has been hailed as the future but has data security implications. Photograph: Alamy According to Google the future is in the cloud soon we may all have information about us kept there, wherever "there" is. Organisations no longer have to store data, including personal data, on their own servers in their own premises; economies of scale coupled with relatively straightforward technology mean that if there is storage space available for the data I control and process over there, somewhere, I can store it over there, using space on a server that would otherwise be left empty. Very simply, that is what the "cloud" is and enables. It is not(yet) any server that we can use to store our data, but any server that is opened up to us, under a cloud computing agreement. And the cost saving, inevitably, is very attractive to the company whose data storage needs exceed its ability, or willingness, to invest in ever bigger data storage for sole use. The data security implications have been a cause for concern in the European Union, which is involved in regulating the way our private information is handled. Data protection law requires businesses to protect personal data from unauthorised or unlawful processing and against accidental loss, destruction and damage. In addition, personal data must not be transferred outside the European Economic Area unless it goes to a country that has adequate protection for the rights and freedoms of individuals in relation to the way it is processed and stored. The challenge presented by the cloud is that these simple statements are out of date. I don't actually know where I am storing data in the cloud. All I know is that when I need it, it's available to me. It is being stored somewhere out there where storage is cheap, or where there is available storage space. I could make the scenario more complex I collect data in the UK, store it in Portugal, and share it with my Danish subsidiary. Or to add greater complexity I store it(let's think topically), it turns out, partly in Egypt, through my cloud storage supplier. And as a data subject(the person about whom the data relates), while I might have some legal redress if the data about me leaks, what I really want to know is that when I give it to you to look after, you're not going to scatter it to the corners of the world for everyone to see. Businesses face a number of potentially conflicting pressures: to cut costs and to achieve the full benefits of technology on the one hand and on the other, to ensure that personal data is kept safe and complies with the law. Guidance produced by the UK Information Commissioner 's Office last July warns that organisations using cloud computing must not relinquish control of the personal data they collect or expose it to security risks that wouldn't have arisen if it had been kept in the UK. The ICO guidance says there must be a written contract in place to require the web service provider to follow instructions from the business using it and to have equivalent security in place. It also says it is good practice to encrypt data before it is transferred to protect it from hackers. European digital agenda commissioner, Neelie Kroes, has urged those building clouds to include appropriate levels of data security in their services. At the same time, the EU is in the process of reviewing the general legal framework for the protection of personal data(with a view to proposing a new directive this year) and is looking to release a cloud computing strategy document in 2012. Where those issues land over the next 12 months should determine how we lawfully handle data for the next decade. In the meantime, it's a moving target. Adam Rose is a partner at Berwin Leighton Paisner and specialises in outsourcing and information technology matters 